---
date: 2026-01-10 12:00:00
draft: false
title: S01E00 - Introduction
summary: So - we are about to set foot in the Twelve Duchies for the first time.
  I have three characters already, taken from the fiction that I wrote years
  ago. I'm going to start with a sort of solo session zero and outline a bit
  about them. I'm being intentionally brief - I don't want to spend too much
  time on it as I'd rather details emerge through the story.
slug: s01e00
tags:
  - actual-play
  - ose
categories:
  - Twelve Duchies
---
> [!roll] Questions
> So - we are about to set foot in the Twelve Duchies for the first time. I have three characters already, taken from the fiction that I wrote years ago. I'm going to start with a sort of solo session zero and outline a bit about them. I'm being intentionally brief - I don't want to spend too much time on it as I'd rather details emerge through the story.

## Who are the characters?

Tasha is a young, idealistic cleric of Shallya who believes she can make the world better one patient at a time. She is from a wealthy family in Quabat, groomed for a life of influence and politics. She is estranged from them after firstly refusing a match which, while advantageous to the family, she didn't want and secondly, discarding her wealth to become a healer. She was inspired by the tale of Shallya's Pilgrimage, a 10 year journey the goddess undertook through many lands in the guise of a wandering healer. The Pilgrimage is the central pillar of her follower's faith, showing Shallya's humility and grace, her willingness to seek out those in need. Tasha has committed herself to 10 years of travel and pilgrimage, following the path of the goddess wherever it leads.

Hadley has spent most of his life with a sword in his hand, first as a soldier in the armies of the Duchy of Nemus and later as a mercenary. Years of fighting left him hardened but his sense of purpose was all but gone, replaced with something hollow and bitter. Meeting Tasha did not redeem him so much as unsettle him, forcing him to confront how far he had drifted from the man he once intended to be. Now he endures violence rather than seeking it, quietly yearning for a place beyond war’s reach, though he doubts such a refuge truly exists. Tasha's journey caught his imagination, touched his spirit and gave him hope that he might find his peace somewhere on Shallya's road. While he is not a follower of the goddess, he has great respect for Tasha's determination and wants help her as best he can.

Elena was born to the elven tribes that walk the deep forests of southern Savis. When the wanderlust took hold of her, it carried with it a private resolve, helping to sharpen her talent for arcane arts into something with purpose. She travels the duchies in search of lore, mentors, and forgotten truths, in the hope that one day she will have the strength to right a great wrong, the memory of which she holds deep in her heart. Shallya is known to the elves by the name "Eir" and their lore about her is different but they recognise her power. Elena travels with Tasha and Hadley partly through expedience - a cleric is a useful and often well received companion - but largely through gratitude. She feels indebted to them for saving her from a horrible fate.

## How did they meet?

Hadley and Tasha met in the aftermath of one of the many mercenary raids Hadley undertook. She healed him of his wounds and he found himself captivated by the young healer who selflessly risked her own life to help others - for the first time he saw the possibility of a different existence. When the mercenary band broke camp, Hadley stayed, offering his help to Tasha while their roads ran together.

A few weeks later, when they happened to stumble across a bandit group in southern Quabat who were pursuing Elena, intent on capturing the elf and selling her into slavery, Hadley's sword and Tasha's wits allowed them to rescue the elf and she has been travelling with them since.

## Where are they?

As the adventure opens Hadley, Tasha and Elena are on a cargo ship, the Running Hind, crossing the inland sea known as Footprint Lake. They left Quabat a few days ago heading for Kethryn, the capital city of Cern, on the western side of the lake. There is a shrine to Shallya near Kethryn that marks the site of a seminal event on the goddess' pilgrimage that Tasha wants to visit.
