---
title: Puppetry
published: True
tags: [puppet,d3r]
date: 2014-10-21
excerpt: Even small network infrastructures need careful management. A quick note on the decision to move to puppet - a "why" and a promise of future "hows".
---

At [work][d3r] we have a small but growing group of machines that we use to serve
our production and staging sites. We're [debian fans][debian] and up until recently
we've been controlling the software stack by means of in house deb packages. This
worked relatively well at first but has become more of a pain as we've moved into
hosting on [linux containers][lxc]. The work of generating new packages as the
software stack starts to evolve has become time consuming and inefficient particularly
as only a couple of the technial team have debian skills.

After some thought and debate we decided that we wanted to move towards a much
more automated machine deployment strategy. After much reading and tinkering around
we settled on [Puppet][puppetlabs] for a number of reasons:

* Its simple to install
* Its widely used
* There are a million modules out there for every package you can think of
* The configuration language (while a bit weird) is easy to pick up
* Its simple to run your configurations from version control

[Chef][chef] was also in the running but I really didn't like the ethos of the
configuration. I much prefer the approach of describing how I want the system to
look and letting the software sort it out, rather than having to write how I want
it to get there. It also seemed that you need several services running on the chef
machine from Solr through to the Chef server process itself, while with Puppet
there's a single master service.

Its taken a few false starts to decide on an architecture for our manifests. Every
man and his dog will give you an opinion on how they should be written / arranged.
Here's a quick run down of our journey through Puppet configuration land (!).

The difficulty with writing a decent puppet configuration is (this from someone
who's done comparatively little of it as yet) that if you're not careful you can
quickly generate a mess. Its very easy to find your self hardcoding machine specifics
into your manifests, putting some bits in site.pp and other bits in a custom manifest,
defining exceptions for you configurations with big if statements, etc ad nauseam.
This is familiar territory for me, coming from a development background. Developers
(at least the good ones) spend quite a lot of time and effort attempting to avoid
making messy systems. As i started writing some experimental manifests it became
apparent quite quickly, that if I wasn't careful I'd end up making a pig's ear of
it. But how should these things be structured? What does a good configuration
look like?

## Roles, Profiles and Params

If you do any reading about puppet configuration, sooner or later you'll come
across two paradigms that are generally accepted as 'best practice' in the
puppet world. One talks about how you should write your manifests and the other
says how you should arrange them.


[d3r]: http://d3r.com
[debian]: http://www.debian.org
[lxc]: https://linuxcontainers.org/
[puppetlabs]: http://puppetlabs.com/
[chef]: https://www.getchef.com/chef/
[roles]: https://puppetlabs.com/presentations/designing-puppet-rolesprofiles-pattern
